_lnu JiM.
THE ART OF LOVING
Copyright © 1956 by Erich Fromm
Printed in the United States of America
All rights in this book are reserved,—^ No part of the book may be used or reproduced
in any manner whatsoever without written per- mission except in the case of/ brief quotations
embodied in critical articles/ and reviews. For
information address Harper & Row,
10 East 53d Street \ New York, N.Y. 10022 X 79 80^32 31 30
Library of Congress catalog card number: 56-8750
Contents
ii.
hi.
World Perspectives ix Foreword xix
Is Love an Art? 1 The Theory of Love 7
1. Love, the Answer to the Problem of
>Human Existence
2. Love Between Parent and Child
3. The Objects of Love
a. Brotherly Love
b. Motherly Love
c. Erotic Love
d. Self-Love
e. Love of God
Love and Its Disintegration in Contemporary Western Society 83
The Practice of Love 107
Cs
World Perspectives
WORLD PERSPECTIVES is dedicated to the concept of man born out of a universe perceived through a fresh vision of reality. Its aim is to present short books written by the
most conscious and responsible minds of today. Each volume
represents the thought and belief of each author and sets forth the interrelation of the changing religious, scientific,
artistic, political, economic and social influences upon man's
total experience.
This Series is committed to a re-examination of all those
sides of human endeavor which the specialist was taught to
believe he could safely leave aside. It interprets present and
past events impinging on human life in our growing World
Age and envisages what man may yet attain when sum- moned by an unbending inner necessity to the quest of what
is most exalted in him. Its purpose is to offer new vistas in terms of world and human development while refusing to betray the intimate correlation between universality and in- dividuality, dynamics and form, freedom and destiny. Each
author treats his subject from the broad perspective of the
world community, not from the Judaeo-Christian, Western
or Eastern viewpoint alone. Certain fundamental questions which have received too
little consideration in the face of the spiritual, moral and
political world crisis of our day, and in the light of technology
X WORLD PERSPECTIVES
which has released the creative energies of peoples, are
treated in these books. Our authors deal with the increas- ing realization that spirit and nature are not separate andapart; that intuition and reason must regain their importance
as the means of perceiving and fusing inner being with outer
reality.
World Perspectives endeavors to show that the conception
of wholeness, unity, organism is a higher and more concrete conception than that of matter and energy. Thus it wouldseem that science itself must ultimately pursue the aim of in- terpreting the physical world of matter and energy in terms
of the biological conception of organism. An enlarged meaning of life, of biology, not as it is revealed in the test tube of
the laboratory but) as it is experienced within the organism
of life itself is attempted in this Series. For the principle of
life consists in the tension which connects spirit with the
realm of matted. The element of life is dominant in the very
texture q£ nature, thus rendering life, biology, a transempirical science. The laws of life have their origin beyond their mere physical manifestations and compel us to consider their
spiritual source. In fact, the widening of the conceptual
framework has not only^served to restore order within the
respective branches of knowledge, but has also disclosed
analogies in man's position regarding the analysis and synthesis of experience in apparently separated domains of knowledge suggesting the possibility of an ever more embracing objective description of the meaning of life. Knowledge, it is shown in these books, no longer consists in a manipulation of mstn and nature as opposite forces, nor
in the reduction of data to mere statistical order, but is a
WORLD PERSPECTIVES XI means of liberating mankind from the destructive power of
fear, pointing the way toward the goal of the rehabilitation of the human will and the rebirth of faith and confidence in the human person. The works published also endeavor to reveal that the cry for patterns, systems and authorities is growing less insistent as the desire grows stronger in both
East and West for the recovery of a dignity, integrity and
self-realization which are the inalienable rights of man who
may now guide change by means of conscious purpose in the
light of rational experience.
Other vital questions explored relate to problems of inter- national understanding as well as to problems dealing with
prejudice and the resultant tensions and antagonisms. The
growing perception and responsibility of our World Age
point to the new reality that the individual person and the
collective person supplement and integrate each other; that
the thrall of totalitarianism of both right and left has been
shaken in the universal desire to recapture the authority of truth and of human totality. Mankind can finally place its trust not in a proletarian authoritarianism, not in a secular- ized humanism, both of which have betrayed the spiritual
property right of history, but in a sacramental brotherhood
and in the unity of knowledge. This new consciousness has
created a widening of human horizons beyond every parochialism, and a revolution in human thought comparable to the basic assumption, among the ancient Greeks, of the
sovereignty of reason; corresponding to the great effulgence
of the moral conscience articulated by the Hebrew prophets;
analogous to the fundamental assertions of Christianity; or
to the beginning of a new scientific era, the era of the science
Xll WORLD PERSPECTIVES
of dynamics, the experimental foundations of whichwerelaid by Galileo in the Renaissance.
An important effort of this Series is to re-examinethecontradictory meanings and applications which are giventoday to such terms as democracy, freedom, justice, love,peace, brotherhood and God. The purpose of such inquiriesis to clear the way for the foundation of a genuine worldhistory not in terms of nation or race or culture but in termsof man in relation to God, to himself, his fellow manandthe universe that reach beyond immediate self-interest. Forthe meaning of the World Age consists in respecting man'shopes and dreams which lead to a deeper understandingofthe basic values of all peoples.
Today in the East and in the West men are discoveringthat they are bound together, beyond any divisiveness, byamore fundamental unity than any mere agreement in thoughtand doctrine. They are beginning to know that all menpossess the same primordial desires and tendencies; thatthedomination of man over man can no longer be justifiedbyany appeal to God or nature; and such consciousness is thefruit of the spiritual and moral revolution, the great seismicupheaval, through which humanity is now passing.
World Perspectives is planned to gain insight intothemeaning of man, who not only is determined by historybutwho also determines history. History is to be understoodasconcerned not only with the life of man on this planetbutas including also such cosmic influences as interpenetrateourhuman world.
This generation is discovering that history does not con-form to the social optimism of modern civilization andthat
WORLD PERSPECTIVES Xlllthe organization of human communities and the establish-ment of justice, freedom and peace are not only intellectualachievements but spiritual and moral achievements as well,demanding a cherishing of the wholeness of human personality and constituting a never-ending challenge to man,emerging from the abyss of meaninglessness and suffering, tobe renewed and replenished in the totality of his life. "Foras one's thinking is, such one becomes, and it is becauseofthis that thinking should be purified and transformed, forwere it centered upon truth as it is now upon things perceptible to the senses, who would not be liberated fromhisbondage.9
' * There is in mankind today a counterforce to the sterilityand danger of a quantitative, anonymous mass culture, anew, if sometimes imperceptible, spiritual sense of conver-gence toward world unity on the basis of the sacredness ofeach human person and respect for the plurality of cultures.There is a growing awareness that equality and justice arenot to be evaluated in mere numerical terms but that theyare proportionate and analogical in their reality.
We stand at the brink of the age of the world in whichhuman life presses forward to actualize new forms. The falseseparation of man and nature, of time and space, of free-dom and security, is acknowledged and we are faced withanew vision of man in his organic unity and of history offer-ing a richness and diversity of quality and majesty of scopehitherto unprecedented. In relating the accumulated wisdomof man's spirit to the new reality of the World Age,inarticulating its thought and belief, World Perspectives seeks* Mditri Upanishad 6.34.4. 6,
XIV WORLD PERSPECTIVES
to encourage a renaissance of hope in society and of pridein man's decision as to what his destiny will be. The vast extension of knowledge has led to a diminutionof consciousness as a result of the tendency, due to somemodern interpretations of science, to accept as the total truthonly limited descriptions of truth. The triumphant advanceof science, culminating in new realities concerning the subatomic world and overthrowing traditional assumptionsofcausality and uniformity, has almost succeeded in enfeeblingman's faith in his spiritual and moral worth and in his ownsignificance in the cosmic scheme. The experience of dread,into which contemporary man has been plunged throughhisfailure to transcend his existential limits, is the experienceofthe problem of whether he shall attain to being through theknowledge of himself or shall not, whether he shall annihilatenothingness or whether nothingness shall annihilate him.For he has been forced back to his origins as a result of theatrophy of meaning, and his anabasis may begin once morethrough his mysterious greatness to re-create his life. The suffering and hope of this century have their originin the interior drama in which the spirit is thrust as a resultof the split within itself, and in the invisible forces whichareborn in the heart and mind of man. This suffering andthishope arise also from material problems, economic, political,technological. History itself is not a mere mechanical unfolding of events in the center of which man finds himself asastranger in a foreign land. The specific modern emphasisonhistory as progressive, the specific prophetic emphasis onGod as acting through history, and the specific Christianemphasis on the historical nature of revelation must now
WORLD PERSPECTIVES XVsurrender to the new history embracing the new cosmology
a profound event which is in the process of birth in the
womb of that invisible universe which is the mind and heart
of man. For our World Age is indeed the most dire andapocalyptic mankind has ever faced in all history, and the
endeavor of World Perspectives is to point to that ultimate
moral power at work in the universe, that very power uponwhich all human effort must at last depend.
This is the crisis in consciousness made articulate throughthe crisis in science. This is the new awakening after a long
history which had its genesis in Descartes' denial that theol- ogy could exist as a science, on the one hand, and on the
other, in Kant's denial that metaphysics could exist as a
science. Some fossilized forms of such positivistic thinking
still remain, manifesting themselves in a quasi-sociological
mythology which, in the guise of scientific concepts, has generated a new animism resulting in a more primitive religion
than the traditional faiths which it endeavors to replace.
However, it is now conceded, out of the influences of Whitehead, Bergson and some phenomenologists that in addition
to natural science with its tendency to isolate quantitative
values there exists another category of knowledge whereinphilosophy, utilizing its own instruments, is able to grasp
the essence and innermost nature of the Absolute, of reality.
The mysterious universe is now revealing to philosophy andto science as well an enlarged meaning of nature and of man which extends beyond mathematical and experimental
analysis of sensory phenomena. This meaning reiects tht>
XVI WORLD PERSPECTIVES
of mythology adequate only for the satisfaction of emotionalneeds. In other words, the fundamental problems of philosophy, those problems which are central to life, are againconfronting science and philosophy itself. Our problem is todiscover a principle of differentiation and yet relationshiplucid enough to justify and to purify both scientific andphilosophical knowledge by accepting their mutual inter-dependence.
Justice itself which has been "in a state of pilgrimage andcrucifixion" and now is slowly being liberated from the gripof social and political demonologies in the East as well as inthe West, begins to question its own premises. Those modernrevolutionary movements which have challenged the sacredinstitutions of society by protecting social injustice in thename of social justice are also being examined and re-evaluated in World Perspectives.
When we turn our gaze retrospectively to the early cosmiccondition of man in the third millennium, we observe thatthe concept of justice as something to which man has an in-alienable right began slowly to take form and, at the time ofHammurabi in the second millennium, justice as inherentlya part of man's nature and not as a beneficent gift to bebestowed, became part of the consciousness of society. Thisconcept of human rights consisted in the demand for justicein the universe, a demand which exists also in the twentiethcentury through a curious analogy. In accordance with theancient view, man could himself become a god, could assumethe identity of the great cosmic forces in the universe whichsurrounded him. He could influence this universe, not bysupplication, but by action. And now again this consciousness
WORLD PERSPECTIVES XV11of man's harmonious relationship with the universe, withsociety and with his fellow men, can be actualized, and againnot through supplication but through the deed.
Though never so powerful materially and technologically,Western democracy, with its concern for the sacrednessofthe human person gone astray, has never before beensoseriously threatened, morally and spiritually. Nationalse-curity and individual freedom are in ominous conflict. Thepossibility of a universal community and the techniqueofdegradation exist side by side. There is no doubt that evilisaccumulated among men in their passionate desire for unity.And yet, confronted with this evil which had split, isolatedand killed the living reality, confronted with death, man,from the very depths of his soul, cries out for "the un-mediated whole of feeling and thought" and for the possibility to reassemble the fragments, to restore unity throughjustice. Christianity in history could only reply to this protestagainst evil by the Annunciation of the Kingdom, bythepromise of Eternal Life—which demanded faith. Butthespiritual and moral suffering of man had exhausted his faithand his hope. He was left alone. His suffering remainedunexplained.
However, man has now reached the last extremityofdenigration. He yearns to consecrate himself. And so, amongthe spiritual and moral ruins of the West and of the Eastarenaissance is prepared beyond the limits of nihilism, darkness and despair. In the depths of the Western and Easternspiritual night, civilization with its many faces turningto-ward its source may rekindle its light in an imminent newdawn—even as in the last book of Revelation which speaks
XV1U WORLD PERSPECTIVES
of a Second Coming with a new heaven, a new earth andanew religious quality of life. And I saw a new heaven and a new
earth: for the first heaven and the
first earth were passed away. . . .* In spite of the infinite obligation of men and in spiteoftheir finite power, in spite of the intransigence of nationalisms, and in spite of spiritual bereavement and moralamnesia, beneath the apparent turmoil and upheaval ofthepresent, and out of the transformations of this dynamicperiod with the unfolding of a world-consciousness, the purpose of World Perspectives is to help quicken the "unshakenheart of well-rounded truth'
5 and interpret the significantelements of the World Age now taking shape out of thecoreof that undimmed continuity of the creative process whichrestores man to mankind while deepening and enhancinghiscommunion with the universe.
New York, 1956 Ruth Nanda AnshenRevelation, 21:1.
Foreword
THE READING of this book would be a disappointing ex-perience for anyone who expects easy instruction in the artof loving. This book, on the contrary, wants to show thatlove is not a sentiment which can be easily indulged in byanyone, regardless of the level of maturity reached by him.It wants to convince the reader that all his attempts for loveare bound to fail, unless he tries most actively to develophis total personality, so as to achieve a productive orientation; that satisfaction in individual love cannot be attainedwithout the capacity to love one's neighbor, without truehumility, courage, faith and discipline. In a culture in whichthese qualities are rare, the attainment of the capacitytolove must remain a rare achievement. Or—anyone can askhimself how many truly loving persons he has known.
Yet, the difficulty of the task must not be a reasontoabstain from trying to know the difficulties as well as theconditions for its achievement. To avoid unnecessary complications I have tried to deal with the problem in a languagewhich is non-technical as far as this is possible. For the samereason I have also kept to a minimum references to theliterature on love. For another problem I did not find a completely satisfac-tory solution; that, namely, of avoiding repetition of ideasexpressed in previous books of mine. The reader familiar,
XX FOREWORD
especially, with Escape from Freedom, Man for Himself,and The Sane Society, will find in this book many ideas ex-pressed in these previous works. However, The Art of Lovingis by no means mainly a recapitulation. It presents manyideas beyond the previously expressed ones, and quite naturally even older ones sometimes gain new perspectivesbythe fact that they are all centered around one topic, thatof the art of loving. E. F.
He who knows nothing, loves nothing. He whocan do nothing understands nothing. He whounderstands nothing is worthless. But he whounderstands also loves, notices, sees. . . . Themore knowledge is inherent in a thing, the
greater the love. . . . Anyone who imaginesthat all fruits ripen at the same time as the
strawberries knows nothing about grapes. Paracelsus
Is Love an Art?
IS LOVE an art? Then it requires knowledge and effort. Oris love a pleasant sensation, which to experience is a matterof chance, something one "falls into'
5 if one is lucky? Thislittle book is based on the former premise, while undoubtedlythe majority of people today believe in the latter. Not that people think that love is not important. Theyarestarved for it; they watch endless numbers of films abouthappy and unhappy love stories, they listen to hundredsoftrashy songs about love—yet hardly anyone thinks that thereis anything that needs to be learned about love. This peculiar attitude is based on several premises whicheither singly or combined tend to uphold it. Most peopleseethe problem of love primarily as that of being loved, ratherthan that of loving, of one's capacity to love. Hencetheproblem to them is how to be loved, how to be lovable.Inpursuit of this aim they follow several paths. One, whichisespecially used by men, is to be successful, to be as powerfuland rich as the social margin of one's position permits. Another, used especially by women, is to make oneself attractive, by cultivating one's body, dress, etc. Other waysof
2 THE ART OF LOVING
making oneself attractive, used both by men and women,areto develop pleasant manners, interesting conversation, to behelpful, modest, inoffensive. Many of the ways to makeoneself lovable are the same as those used to make oneself successful, "to win friends and influence people." Asa matter of fact, what most people in our culture meanbybeing lovable is essentially a mixture between being popularand having sex appeal.
A second premise behind the attitude that there is nothingto be learned about love is the assumption that the problemof love is the problem of an object, not the problem ofafaculty. People think that to love is simple, but that to findthe right object to love—or to be loved by—is difficult. Thisattitude has several reasons rooted in the developmentofmodern society. One reason is the great change whichoc-curred in the twentieth century with respect to the choiceof a "love object." In the Victorian age, as in many tradi-tional cultures, love was mostly not a spontaneous personalexperience which then might lead to marriage. On the contrary, marriage was contracted by convention—either bytherespective families, or by a marriage broker, or without thehelp of such intermediaries; it was concluded on the basis ofsocial considerations, and love was supposed to develop oncethe marriage had been concluded. In the last few generationsthe concept of romantic love has become almost universalin the Western world. In the United States, while considerations of a conventional nature are not entirely absent, toavast extent people are in search of "romantic love," of thepersonal experience of love which then should lead to marriage. This new concept of freedom in love must have greatly
IS LOVE AN ART? 3enhanced the importance of the object as against the importance of the function.
Closely related to this factor is another feature characteristic of contemporary culture. Our whole culture is basedon the appetite for buying, on the idea of a mutually favorable exchange. Modern man's happiness consists in the thrillof looking at the shop windows, and in buying all that hecan afford to buy, either for cash or on installments. He(orshe) looks at people in a similar way. For the man an attractive girl—and for the woman an attractive man—are theprizes they are after. "Attractive*
5 usually means a nice package of qualities which are popular and sought after on thepersonality market. What specifically makes a person attractive depends on the fashion of the time, physically as well asmentally. During the twenties, a drinking and smoking girl,tough and sexy, was attractive; today the fashion demandsmore domesticity and coyness. At the end of the nineteenthand the beginning of this century, a man had to be aggressive and ambitious—today he has to be social and tolerant
in order to be an attractive "package." At any rate, the senseof falling in love develops usually only with regard to suchhuman commodities as are within reach of one's own possibilities for exchange. I am out for a bargain; the object shouldbe desirable from the standpoint of its social value, and at thesame time should want me, considering my overt and hiddenassets and potentialities. Two persons thus fall in love whenthey feel they have found the best object available on themarket, considering the limitations of their own exchangevalues. Often, as in buying real estate, the hidden potentialities which can be developed play a considerable role in this
4 THE ART OF LOVING
bargain. In a culture in which the marketing orientationprevails, and in which material success is the outstandingvalue, there is little reason to be surprised that humanloverelations follow the same pattern of exchange which governsthe commodity and the labor market.
The third error leading to the assumption that thereisnothing to be learned about love lies in the confusion betweenthe initial experience of "falling" in love, and the permanentstate of being in love, or as we might better say, of "standing" in love. If two people who have been strangers, as allof us are, suddenly let the wall between them break down,and feel close, feel one, this moment of oneness is one of themost exhilarating, most exciting experiences in life. It is allthe more wonderful and miraculous for persons whohavebeen shut off, isolated, without love. This miracle of suddenintimacy is often facilitated if it is combined with, or initiatedby, sexual attraction and consummation. However, this typeof love is by its very nature not lasting. The two personsbecome well acquainted, their intimacy loses more and moreits miraculous character, until their antagonism, their disappointments, their mutual boredom kill whatever is left of theinitial excitement. Yet, in the beginning they do not knowall this: in fact, they take the intensity of the infatuation,this being "crazy" about each other, for proof of thein-tensity of their love, while it may only prove the degreeoftheir preceding loneliness. This attitude—that nothing is easier than to love—hascontinued to be the prevalent idea about love in spite of theoverwhelming evidence to the contrary. There is hardly anyactivity, any enterprise, which is started with such tremen-
IS LOVE AN ART? 5dous hopes and expectations, and yet, which fails so regularly, as love. If this were the case with any other activity,people would be eager to know the reasons for the failure,and to learn how one could do better—or they wouldgiveup the activity. Since the latter is impossible in the caseoflove, there seems to be only one adequate w
ray to overcomethe failure of love—to examine the reasons for this failure,and to proceed to study the meaning of love. The first step to take is to become aware that love is anart, just as living is an art; if we want to learn how to lovewe must proceed in the same way we have to proceed if wewant to learn any other art, say music, painting, carpentry,or the art of medicine or engineering.
What are the necessary steps in learning any art? The process of learning an art can be divided convenientlyinto two parts: one, the mastery of the theory; the other,the mastery of the practice. If I want to learn the art ofmedicine, I must first know the facts about the humanbody,and about various diseases. When I have all this theoreticalknowledge, I am by no means competent in the art of medicine. I shall become a master in this art only after a greatdeal of practice, until eventually the results of my theoreticalknowledge and the results of my practice are blended intoone—my intuition, the essence of the mastery of anyart.But, aside from learning the theory and practice, there is athird factor necessary to becoming a master in any art—themastery of the art must be a matter of ultimate concern;there must be nothing else in the world more important thanthe art. This holds true for music, for medicine, for car-pentry—and for love. And, maybe, here lies the answerto
b THE ART OF LOVING
the question of why people in our culture try so rarelytolearn this art, in spite of their obvious failures: in spiteofthe deep-seated craving for love, almost everything elseisconsidered to be more important than love : success, prestige,money, power—almost all our energy is used for the learn-ing of how to achieve these aims, and almost none to learnthe art of loving.
Could it be that only those things are considered worthyof being learned with which one can earn money or prestige,and that love, which "only55 profits the soul, but is profitlessin the modern sense, is a luxury we have no right to spendmuch energy on? However this may be, the following discus-sion will treat the art of loving in the sense of the foregoingdivisions: first I shall discuss the theory of love—andthiswill comprise the greater part of the book; and secondlyIshall discuss the practice of love—little as can be said aboutpractice in this, as in any other field.
II.
The Theory of Love
I. LOVE, THE ANSWER TO THE PROBLEM OF HUMANEXISTENCE
ANY THEORY of love must begin with a theory of man,of human existence. While we find love, or rather, theequivalent of love, in animals, their attachments are mainlya part of their instinctual equipment; only remnants of thisinstinctual equipment can be seen operating in man. Whatis essential in the existence of man is the fact that he hasemerged from the animal kingdom, from instinctive adaptation, that he has transcended nature—although he neverleaves it; he is a part of it—and yet once torn away fromnature, he cannot return to it; once thrown out of paradise—a state of original oneness with nature—cherubim withflaming swords block his way, if he should try to return.Man can only go forward by developing his reason, by find-ing a new harmony, a human one, instead of the prehumanharmony which is irretrievably lost. When man is born, the human race as well as the indi-vidual, he is thrown out of a situation which was definite, as7
8 THE ART OF LOVING
definite as the instincts, into a situation which is indefinite,uncertain and open. There is certainty only about the pastand about the future only as far as that it is death.
Man is gifted with reason; he is life being aware of itself;he has awareness of himself, of his fellow man, of his past,and of the possibilities of his future. This awareness of himself as a separate entity, the awareness of his own shortlifespan, of the fact that without his will he is born and againsthis will he dies, that he will die before those whom he loves,or they before him, the awareness of his aloneness andseparateness, of his helplessness before the forces of natureandof society, all this makes his separate, disunited existenceanunbearable prison. He would become insane could henotliberate himself from this prison and reach out, unite himselfin some form or other with men, with the world outside.The experience of separateness arouses anxiety; it is, in-deed, the source of all anxiety. Being separate meansbeingcut off, without any capacity to use my human powers.Hence to be separate means to be helpless, unable to graspthe world—things and people—actively; it means thattheworld can invade me without my ability to react. Thus,separateness is the source of intense anxiety. Beyond that,itarouses shame and the feeling of guilt. This experienceofguilt and shame in separateness is expressed in the Biblicalstory of Adam and Eve. After Adam and Eve have eatenofthe "tree of knowledge of good and evil," after they havedisobeyed (there is no good and evil unless there is freedomto disobey), after they have become human by having emancipated themselves from the original animal harmonywithnature, i.e., after their birth as human beings—theysaw
THE THEORY OF LOVE 9"that they were naked—and they were ashamed." Shouldwe assume that a myth as old and elementary as this hasthe prudish morals of the nineteenth-century outlook, andthat the important point the story wants to convey to usisthe embarrassment that their genitals were visible? Thiscanhardly be so, and by understanding the story in a Victorianspirit, we miss the main point, which seems to be the following: after man and woman have become aware of themselves and of each other, they are aware of their separateness,and of their difference, inasmuch as they belong to differentsexes. But while recognizing their separateness they remainstrangers, because they have not yet learned to love eachother (as is also made very clear by the fact that Adamdefends himself by blaming Eve, rather than by tryingtodefend her). The awareness of human separation, withoutreunion by love—is the source of shame. It is at the sametime the source of guilt and anxiety.
The deepest need of man, then, is the need to overcomehis separateness, to leave the prison of his aloneness. Theabsolute failure to achieve this aim means insanity, becausethe panic of complete isolation can be overcome only bysucha radical withdrawal from the world outside that the feelingof separation disappears—because the world outside, fromwhich one is separated, has disappeared.
Man—of all ages and cultures—is confronted withthesolution of one and the same question: the question of howto overcome separateness, how to achieve union, how to tran-scend one's own individual life and find at-onement. Thequestion is the same for primitive man living in caves, fornomadic man taking care of his flocks, for the peasantin
10 THE ART OF LOVING
Egypt, the Phoenician trader, the Roman soldier, the medieval monk, the Japanese samurai, the modern clerk andfac-tory hand. The question is the same, for it springs fromthe same ground: the human situation, the conditionsofhuman existence. The answer varies. The question canbeanswered by animal worship, by human sacrifice or mili-tary conquest, by indulgence in luxury, by ascetic renunciation, by obsessional work, by artistic creation, by the loveofGod, and by the love of Man. While there are many answers—the record of which is human history—they are nevertheless not innumerable. On the contrary, as soon as one ignoressmaller differences which belong more to the periphery thanto the center, one discovers that there is only a limited number of answers which have been given, and only could havebeen given by man in the various cultures in which hehaslived. The history of religion and philosophy is the historyofthese answers, of their diversity, as well as of their limitationin number.
The answers depend, to some extent, on the degreeofindividuation which an individual has reached. In the infantI-ness has developed but little yet; he still feels one withmother, has no feeling of separateness as long as motherispresent. Its sense of aloneness is cured by the physical pres-ence of the mother, her breasts, her skin. Only to the degreethat the child develops his sense of separateness and individuality is the physical presence of the mother not sufficientany more, and does the need to overcome separatenessinother ways arise. Similarly, the human race in its infancy still feels one withnature. The soil, the animals, the plants are still man's world.
THE THEORY OF LOVE IIHe identifies himself with animals, and this is expressedbythe wearing of animal masks, by the worshiping of a totemanimal or animal gods. But the more the human race emergesfrom these primary bonds, the more it separates itself fromthe natural world, the more intense becomes the need to findnew ways of escaping separateness.
One way of achieving this aim lies in all kinds of orgiasticstates. These may have the form of an auto-induced trance,sometimes with the help of drugs. Many rituals of primitivetribes offer a vivid picture of this type of solution. In a transi-tory state of exaltation the world outside disappears, andwith it the feeling of separateness from it. Inasmuch as theserituals are practiced in common, an experience of fusion withthe group is added which makes this solution all the moreeffective. Closely related to, and often blended with thisorgiastic solution, is the sexual experience. The sexual orgasmcan produce a state similar to the one produced by a trance,or to the effects of certain drugs. Rites of communal sexualorgies were a part of many primitive rituals. It seems thatafter the orgiastic experience, man can go on for a timewithout suffering too much from his separateness. Slowlythetension of anxiety mounts, and then is reduced again bytherepeated performance of the ritual. As long as these orgiastic states are a matter of commonpractice in a tribe, they do not produce anxiety or guilt. Toact in this way is right, and even virtuous, because it is away shared by all, approved and demanded by the medicinemen or priests; hence there is no reason to feel guiltyorashamed. It is quite different when the same solutionischosen by an individual in a culture which has left behind
12 THE ART OF LOVING
these common practices. Alcoholism and drug addiction arethe forms which the individual chooses in a non-orgiasticculture. In contrast to those participating in the socially patterned solution, such individuals suffer from guilt feelingsand remorse. While they try to escape from separatenessbytaking refuge in alcohol or drugs, they feel all the more separate after the orgiastic experience is over, and thus are drivento take recourse to it with increasing frequency and intensity.Slightly different from this is the recourse to a sexual orgiasticsolution. To some extent it is a natural and normal formofovercoming separateness, and a partial answer to the problemof isolation. But in many individuals in whom separatenessisnot relieved in other ways, the search for the sexual orgasmassumes a function which makes it not very different fromalcoholism and drug addiction. It becomes a desperate at-tempt to escape the anxiety engendered by separateness, andit results in an ever-increasing sense of separateness, since thesexual act without love never bridges the gap between twohuman beings, except momentarily.
All forms of orgiastic union have three characteristics:they are intense, even violent; they occur in the total personality, mind and body; they are transitory and periodical.Exactly the opposite holds true for that form of union whichis by far the most frequent solution chosen by man in thepast and in the present : the union based on conformity withthe group, its customs, practices and beliefs. Here again wefind a considerable development.
In a primitive society the group is small; it consists ofthose with whom one shares blood and soil. With the growing development of culture, the group enlarges; it becomes
; THE THEORY OF LOVE 1the citizenry of a polls3 the citizenry of a large state, thej members of a church. Even the poor Roman felt pride(because he could say "clvls romanus sum"; Rome andthej fimpire were his family, his home, his world. Also in con-temporary Western society the union with the group is theprevalent way of overcoming separateness. It is a unioninwhich the individual self disappears to a large extent, andwhere the aim is to belong to the herd. If I am like everybody else, if I have no feelings or thoughts which makemedifferent, if I conform in custom, dress, ideas, to the patternof the group, I am saved; saved from the frightening experi-ence of aloneness. The dictatorial systems use threats andterror to induce this conformity; the democratic countries,suggestion and propaganda. There is, indeed, one great dif-ference between the two systems. In the democracies nonconformity is possible and, in fact, by no means entirelyabsent; in the totalitarian systems, only a few unusual heroes| and martyrs can be expected to refuse obedience. But in spite1 of this difference the democratic societies show an over-| whelming degree of conformity. The reason lies in the factI that there has to be an answer to the quest for union, andif[(there is no other or better way, then the union of herdcon-; formity becomes the predominant one. One can only understand the power of the fear to be different, the fear to beonlya few steps away from the herd, if one understands the depthsof the need not to be separated. Sometimes this fear of nonconformity is rationalized as fear of practical dangers whichcould threaten the non-conformist. But actually, people wantto conform to a much higher degree than they are forcedtoconform, at least in the Western democracies.
14 THE ART OF LOVING
Most people are not even aware of their need to conform.They live under the illusion that they follow their ownideasand inclinations, that they are individualists, that theyhavearrived at their opinions as the result of their own thinkingand that it just happens that their ideas are the same as thoseof the majority. The consensus of all serves as a proof forthecorrectness of "their" ideas. Since there is still a need tofeelsome individuality, such need is satisfied with regard to minordifferences; the initials on the handbag or the sweater,thename plate of the bank teller, the belonging to the Democraticas against the Republican party, to the Elks instead of totheShriners become the expression of individual differences. Theadvertising slogan of "it is different" shows up this patheticneed for difference, when in reality there is hardly anyleft.This increasing tendency for the elimination of differencesis closely related to the concept and the experience of equality, as it is developing in the most advanced industrialsocieties. Equality had meant, in a religious context, thatweare all God's children, that we all share in the same humandivine substance, that we are all one. It meant also thatthevery differences between individuals must be respected,thatwhile it is true that we are all one, it is also true that eachone of us is a unique entity, is a cosmos by itself. Suchconviction of the uniqueness of the individual is expressedforinstance in the Talmudic statement: "Whosoever savesasingle life is as if he had saved the whole world; whosoeverdestroys a single life is as if he had destroyed the wholeworld." Equality as a condition for the development ofin-dividuality was also the meaning of the concept inthephilosophy of the Western Enlightenment. It meant(most
THE THEORY OF LOVE 1clearly formulated by Kant) that no man must be the meansfor the ends of another man. That all men are equal inas-much as they are ends, and only ends, and never meanstoeach other. Following the ideas of the Enlightenment, Socialist thinkers of various schools defined equality as abolitionofexploitation, of the use of man by man, regardless of whetherthis use were cruel or "human."
In contemporary capitalistic society the meaning of equality has been transformed. By equality one refers to theequality of automatons; of men who have lost their individuality. Equality today means "sameness" rather than"oneness." It is the sameness of abstractions, of the menwhowork in the same jobs, who have the same amusements,whoread the same newspapers, who have the same feelings andthe same ideas. In this respect one must also look with someskepticism at some achievements which are usually praisedas signs of our progress, such as the equality of women. Needless to say I am not speaking against the equality of women;but the positive aspects of this tendency for equality mustnot deceive one. It is part of the trend toward the elimination of differences. Equality is bought at this very price:women are equal because they are not different any more.The proposition of Enlightenment philosophy, Vame n*a pasde sexe, the soul has no sex, has become the general practice.The polarity of the sexes is disappearing, and with it eroticlove, which is based on this polarity. Men and womenbe-come the same, not equals as opposite poles. Contemporarysociety preaches this ideal of unindividualized equality be-cause it needs human atoms, each one the same, to makethem function in a mass aggregation, smoothly, without fric-
1

THE ART OF LOVING
tion; all obeying the same commands, yet everybody beingconvinced that he is following his own desires. Just as modern mass production requires the standardization of commodities, so the social process requires standardizationofman, and this standardization is called "equality.'
5 Union by conformity is not intense and violent; it is calm,dictated by routine, and for this very reason often is insufficient to pacify the anxiety of separateness. The incidenceofalcoholism, drug addiction, compulsive sexualism, andsui-cide in contemporary Western society are symptoms of thisrelative failure of herd conformity. Furthermore, this solu-tion concerns mainly the mind and not the body, andforthis reason too is lacking in comparison with the orgiasticsolutions. Herd conformity has only one advantage: it ispermanent, and not spasmodic. The individual is introducedinto the conformity pattern at the age of three or four, andsubsequently never loses his contact with the herd. Evenhisfuneral, which he anticipates as his last great social affair,isin strict conformance with the pattern.
In addition to conformity as a way to relieve the anxietyspringing from separateness, another factor of contemporarylife must be considered : the role of the work routine andofthe pleasure routine. Man becomes a "nine to fiver" heispart of the labor force, or the bureaucratic force of clerksand managers. He has little initiative, his tasks are prescribedby the organization of the work; there is even little differ-ence between those high up on the ladder and those onthebottom. They all perform tasks prescribed by the wholestructure of the organization, at a prescribed speed, andinaprescribed manner. Even the feelings are prescribed: cheer-
THE THEORY OF LOVE 1fulness, tolerance, reliability, ambition, and an ability togettlong with everybody without friction. Fun is routinizedinimilar, although not quite as drastic ways. Books are selected»y the book clubs, movies by the film and theater ownersid the advertising slogans paid for by them; the rest is alsoItiniform: the Sunday ride in the car, the television session,|the card game, the social parties. From birth to death,fromMonday to Monday, from morning to evening—all activitiesiare routinized, and prefabricated. How should a mancaughtin this net of routine not forget that he is a man, a uniqueI individual, one who is given only this one chance of living,|with hopes and disappointments, with sorrow and fear, with; the longing for love and the dread of the nothing andofI separateness?
A third way of attaining union lies in creative activity,beit that of the artist, or of the artisan. In any kind of creativework the creating person unites himself with his material,which represents the world outside of himself. Whetheracarpenter makes a table, or a goldsmith a piece of jewelry,whether the peasant grows his corn or the painter paintsapicture, in all types of creative work the worker andhisobject become one, man unites himself with the worldintheprocess of creation. This, however, holds true only forproductive work, for work in which / plan, produce, seetheresult of my work. In the modern work process of aclerk,the worker on the endless belt, little is left of this unitingquality of work. The worker becomes an appendix tothemachine or to the bureaucratic organization. He has ceasedto be he—hence no union takes place beyond that ofconformity.
1

THE ART OF LOVING
The unity achieved in productive work is not interpersonal; the unity achieved in orgiastic fusion is transitory; theunity achieved by conformity is only pseudo-unity* Hence,they are only partial answers to the problem of existence. Thefull answer lies in the achievement of interpersonal union,offusion with another person, in love. This desire for interpersonal fusion is the most powerfulstriving in man. It is the most fundamental passion, it is theforce which keeps the human race together, the clan, thefamily, society. The failure to achieve it means insanityordestruction-—self-destruction or destruction of others. Without love, humanity could not exist for a day. Yet, if wecallthe achievement of interpersonal union "love," we find ourselves in a serious difficulty. Fusion can be achieved in dif-ferent ways—and the differences are not less significant thanwhat is common to the various forms of love. Should theyallbe called love? Or should we reserve the word "love" onlyfor a specific kind of union, one which has been the idealvirtue in all great humanistic religions and philosophicalsystems of the last four thousand years of Western andEastern history?
As with all semantic difficulties, the answer can onlybearbitrary. What matters is that we know what kind of unionwe are talking about when we speak of love. Do we refertolove as the mature answer to the problem of existence, ordowe speak of those immature forms of love which maybecalled symbiotic union? In the following pages I shall calllove only the former, I shall begin the discussion of "love"with the latter. Symbiotic union has its biological pattern in the relation-
THE THEORY OF LOVE 1
ship between the pregnant mother and the foetus. Theyaretwo, and yet one. They live "together," (sym-biosis) , theyneed each other. The foetus is a part of the mother, it re-ceives everything it needs from her; mother is its world,asit were; she feeds it, she protects it, but also her ownlife isenhanced by it. In the psychic symbiotic union, the twobodies are independent, but the same kind of attachmentexists psychologically.
The passive form of the symbiotic union is that of submission, or if we use a clinical term, of masochism. Themasochistic person escapes from the unbearable feelingofisolation and separateness by making himself part and parcelof another person who directs him, guides him, protects him
who is his life and his oxygen, as it were. The power of theone to whom one submits is inflated, may he be a person oragod; he is everything, I am nothing, except inasmuchasIam part of him. As a part, I am part of greatness, of power,of certainty. The masochistic person does not have to makedecisions, does not have to take any risks; he is never alonebut he is not independent; he has no integrity; he is notyetfully born. In a religious context the object of worshipiscalled an idol; in a secular context of a masochistic lovere-lationship the essential mechanism, that of idolatry, is thesame. The masochistic relationship can be blended withphysical, sexual desire; in this case it is not only a submissionin which one's mind participates, but also one's whole body.There can be masochistic submission to fate, to sickness,torhythmic music, to the orgiastic state produced by drugsorunder hypnotic trance—in all these instances the personre-nounces his integrity, makes himself the instrument of some-
THE ART OF LOVING
body or something outside of himself; he need not solve theproblem of living by productive activity.
The active form of symbiotic fusion is domination or,touse the psychological term corresponding to masochism,sadism. The sadistic person wants to escape from his aloneness and his sense of imprisonment by making another personpart and parcel of himself. He inflates and enhances himselfby incorporating another person, who worships him.
The sadistic person is as dependent on the submissive per-son as the latter is on the former; neither can live withoutthe other. The difference is only that the sadistic personcommands, exploits, hurts, humiliates, and that the masochistic person is commanded, exploited, hurt, humiliated.This is a considerable difference in a realistic sense; inadeeper emotional sense, the difference is not so great as thatwhich they both have in common : fusion without integrity.If one understands this, it is also not surprising to find thatusually a person reacts in both the sadistic and the masochistic manner, usually toward different objects. Hitlerre-acted primarily in a sadistic fashion toward people, butmasochistically toward fate, history, the "higher power"ofnature. His end—suicide among general destruction—is ascharacteristic as was his dream of success—total domination. 1 In contrast to symbiotic union, mature love is union underthe condition of preserving one's integrity, one's individuality. Love is an active power in man; a power which breaksthrough the walls which separate man from his fellow men,1 Cf. a more detailed study of sadism and masochism in E. Fromm,Escape from Freedom, Rinehart & Company, New York, 1941.
THE THEORY OF LOVE 21jityirhich unites him with others; love makes him overcometheIsfense of isolation and separateness, yet it permits himtobeIjihimself, to retain his integrity. In love the paradox occursthat two beings become one and yet remain two.
If we say love is an activity, we face a difficulty whichlies in the ambiguous meaning of the word "activity."ByInactivity," in the modern usage of the word, is usually meant|UV action which brings about a change in an existing situa-|
tion by means of an expenditure of energy. Thus a manisConsidered active if he does business, studies medicine, worksI
1 on an endless belt, builds a table, or is engaged in sports.| Common to all these activities is that they are directedP i I toward an outside goal to be achieved. What is not takeninto| Recount is the motivation of activity. Take for instance aman| driven to incessant work by a sense of deep insecurityandii joneliness; or another one driven by ambition, or greedfor% money* In all these cases the person is the slave of a passion,| and his activity is in reality a "passivity" because heis<; driven; he is the sufferer, not the "actor." On the otherhand, a man sitting quiet and contemplating, with nopurl pose or aim except that of experiencing himself andhis[ oneness with the world, is considered to be "passive," because; he is not "doing" anything. In reality, this attitude of concentrated meditation is the highest activity there is, anactivity of the soul, which is possible only under the conditionof inner freedom and independence. One concept of activity,the modern one, refers to the use of energy for the achievement of external aims; the other concept of activity refers; to the use of man's inherent powers, regardless of whetherany external change is brought about. The latter conceptof
22 THE ART OF LOVING
activity has been formulated most clearly by Spinoza. Hedifferentiates among the affects between active and passiveaffects, "actions" and "passions." In the exercise of an activeaffect, man is free, he is the master of his affect; in theexercise of a passive affect, man is driven, the objectofmotivations of which he himself is not aware. Thus Spinozaarrives at the statement that virtue and power are one andthe same.
2 Envy, jealousy, ambition, any kind of greedarepassions; love is an action, the practice of a human power,which can be practiced only in freedom and never as theresult of a compulsion.
Love is an activity, not a passive affect; it is a "standingin," not a "falling for." In the most general way, the activecharacter of love can be described by stating that loveisprimarily giving, not receiving.
What is giving? Simple as the answer to this questionseems to be, it is actually full of ambiguities and complexities. The most widespread misunderstanding is that whichassumes that giving is "giving up" something, being deprivedof, sacrificing. The person whose character has not developedbeyond the stage of the receptive, exploitative, or hoardingorientation, experiences the act of giving in this way. Themarketing character is willing to give, but only in exchangefor receiving; giving without receiving for him is beingcheated.3 People whose main orientation is a non-productiveone feel giving as an impoverishment. Most individualsof2 Spinoza, Ethics IV, Def. 8.
3 Cf. a detailed discussion of these character orientations in E.Fromm, Man for Himself, Rinehart & Company, New York, 1947,Chap. Ill, pp. 54-117.
THE THEORY OF LOVE 23Ithis type therefore refuse to give. Some make a virtue outof\ giving in the sense of a sacrifice. They feel that just because|it'is painful to give, one should give; the virtue of givingto|: them lies in the very act of acceptance of the sacrifice. For\ them, the norm that it is better to give than to receive meansthat it is better to suffer deprivation than to experiencejoy.For the productive character, giving has an entirelydif-| ferent meaning. Giving is the highest expression of potency.In the very act of giving, I experience my strength,my-''Wealth, my power. This experience of heightened vitalityand potency fills me with joy. I experience myself as overI flowing, spending, alive, hence as joyous.4 Giving is more| joyous than receiving, not because it is a deprivation,butbecause in the act of giving lies the expression of myaliver ness.
It is not difficult to recognize the validity of this principle^applying it to various specific phenomena. The mostele-tnentary example lies in the sphere of sex. The culminationof the male sexual function lies in the act of giving; themangives himself, his sexual organ, to the woman. At the moment| pf orgasm he gives his semen to her. He cannot help givingit if he is potent. If he cannot give, he is impotent. Forthewoman the process is not different, although somewhatmorecomplex. She gives herself too; she opens, the gates toherfeminine center; in the act of receiving, she gives. If sheisincapable of this act of giving, if she can only receive, sheisfrigid. With her the act of giving occurs again, not inherfunction as a lover, but in that as a mother. She givesofherself to the growing child within her, she gives her milkto* Compare the definition of joy given by Spinoza.
24 THE ART OF LOVING